---
title: "2012年6月18日"
date: 2012-06-18
source: "网易博客"
source_url: "http://nteswjq.blog.163.com/blog/static/1269981201251823041820/"
type: "blog"
---


这是我的一个西雅图的朋友发给我的，放上来没事自己可以看看。  

Charlie Munger’s Quotes =?Mungerisms  

Here is my list of “Mungerisms”.Over time I have used many of them to my advantage and the rest are in my list as reminders of ways I could improve my condition or as cautions against folly.I hope you too find them just as helpful as I do.  

If you don’t know who Charlie Munger is , here is a small introduction: http://wealthymatters.com/2011/02/12/charlie-munger/  

(1)”Most people are too fretful, they worry too much.Success means being very patient, but aggressive when it’s time.”  

看完这条可不要too aggressive哈。[[芒格]]本人曾经就因为用margin给自己带来过大麻烦。我这个朋友也喜欢用margin，非常危险。  

(2)”Using [a stock’s] volatility as a measure of risk is nuts. Risk to us is 1) the risk of permanent loss of capital, or 2) the risk of inadequate return. Some great businesses have very volatile returns – for example, See’s [a candy company owned by Berkshire] usually loses money in two quarters of each year – and some terrible businesses can have steady results.”  

(3)”I think that, every time you saw the word EBITDA [earnings], you should substitute the word “bullshit” earnings.”  

(4)“Warren talks about these discounted cash flows. I’ve never seen him do one.”?”It’s true,” replied Buffett. “If the value of a company doesn’t just scream out at you, it’s too close.” 就是[[毛估估]]的意思？  

(5)”If you buy something because it’s undervalued, then you have to think about selling it when it approaches your calculation of its intrinsic value. That’s hard. But if you buy a few great companies, then you can sit on your ass. That’s a good thing.”  

这条大概要花很多年才能真明白，大概就是[[未来现金流折现]]的意思。我觉得自己现在大概有点明白了。  

(6)”We bought a doomed textile mill [Berkshire Hathaway] and a California S&L [Wesco] just before a calamity. Both were bought at a discount to liquidation value.”  

(7)”For society, the Internet is wonderful, but for capitalists, it will be a net negative. It will increase efficiency, but lots of things increase efficiency without increasing profits. It is way more likely to make American businesses less profitable than more profitable.  This is perfectly obvious, but very little understood.” 我也这么认为：internet 实际上是就业杀手，需要很多年才能消化。但是，如果能看懂这个变化则会非常有收获。  

(8)”Virtually every investment expert’s public assessment is that he is above average, no matter what is the evidence to the contrary.”  

这可是芒格说的哈。  

(9)”Investing is where you find a few great companies and then sit on your ass.”  

(10)”Warren spends 70 hours a week thinking about investing.”  

(11)”People calculate too much and think too little.” 投资上看起来确实如此。  

(12)”Whenever you think something or some person is ruining your life, it’s you. A victimization mentality is so debilitating.”  

(13)”The tax code gives you an enormous advantage if you can find some things you can just sit with.” 对美国人尤其如此，外国人投美股有点不同。  

(14)”If you’re going to buy something which compounds for 30 years at 15% per annum and you pay one 35% tax at the very end, the way that works out is that after taxes, you keep 13.3% per annum.  In contrast, if you bought the same investment, but had to pay taxes every year of 35% out of the 15% that you earned, then your return would be 15% minus 35% of 15%—or only 9.75% per year compounded. So the difference there is over 3.5%. And what 3.5% does to the numbers over long holding periods like 30 years is truly eye-opening…” 同上句。  

(15)”The number one idea, is to view a stock as an ownership of the business [and] to judge the staying quality of the business in terms of its competitive advantage. Look for more value in terms of discounted future cash flow than you’re paying for. Move only when you have an advantage. It’s very basic. You have to understand the odds and have the discipline to bet only when the odds are in your favor.” 很稀饭这句。  

(16)”Failure to handle psychological denial is a common way for people to go broke. You’ve made an enormous commitment to something.You’ve poured effort and money in. And the more you put in, the more that the whole consistency principle makes you think,” Now it has to work. If I put in just a little more, then it ’all work…. People go broke that way —because they can ’t stop,rethink,and say,’ I can afford to write this one off and live to fight again. I don’t have to pursue this thing as an obsession —in a way that will break me .’ “  

想起沉入成本。还想起老巴说的，如果是个坑就别再往下挖了。看看有多少人在给自己挖坑就明白了。  

(17)”…in terms of business mistakes that I’ve seen over a long lifetime, I would say that trying to minimize taxes too much is one of the great standard causes of really dumb mistakes. I see terrible mistakes from people being overly motivated by tax considerations. Warren and I personally don’t drill oil wells. We pay our taxes. And we’ve done pretty well, so far. Anytime somebody offers you a tax shelter from here on in life, my advice would be don’t buy it.”  

让我想起那些为避税而搬离加州的有钱的朋友们，为了省那些未来不属于自己的钱而搬到一个自己未必喜欢的地方好像有点滑稽。当然，搬过去  

后又喜欢上了那是有智慧的表现啊，至少我还没听说哪位搬家后说新地方不好的。  

(18)”I believe that we are at or near the apex of a great civilization….In 50-100 years, if we’re a poor third to some countries in Asia, I wouldn’t be surprised. If I had to bet, the part of the world that will do best will be Asia.” 或许50-100年也许稍微短了一点。  

(19)”To some extent, stocks are like Rembrandts. They sell based on what they’ve sold in the past. Bonds are much more rational. No-one thinks a bond’s value will soar to the moon.” “Imagine if every pension fund in America bought Rembrandts. Their value would go up and they would create their own constituency.”  

(20)”It’s crazy to assume that what’s happening in Argentina and Japan is inconceivable here.”  

(21)”REITs are way more suitable for individual shareholders than for corporate shareholders. And Warren has enough residue from his old cigar-butt personality that when people became disenchanted with the REITs and the market price went down to maybe a 20% discount from what the companies could be liquidated for, he bought a few shares with his personal money. So it’s nice that Warren has a few private assets with which to pick up cigar butts in memory of old times – if that’s what keeps him amused.”  

(22)”Smart people aren’t exempt from professional disasters from overconfidence. Often, they just run aground in the more difficult voyages they choose, relying on their self-appraisals that they have superior talents and methods.”  

(23))”The whole concept of the house advantage is an interesting one in modern money management. The terms of the managers of the private partnerships look a lot like the take of the croupier at Monte Carlo, only greater.”  

(24)”There are always people who will be better at some thing than you are.You have to learn to be a follower before you become a leader.”  

(25)”We all are learning, modifying, or destroying ideas all the time. Rapid destruction of your ideas when the time is right is one of the most valuable qualities you can acquire. You must force yourself to consider arguments on the other side. If you can’t state arguments against what you believe better than your detractors, you don’t know enough.”  

(26)“I remember the $0.05 hamburger and a $0.40-per-hour minimum wage, so I’ve seen a tremendous amount of inflation in my lifetime. Did it ruin the investment climate? I think not.”  

(27)”A lot of success in life and business comes from knowing what you want to avoid: early death, a bad marriage, etc.”  

就是坚持不做不对的事情的意思。  

(28)”There are two types of mistakes: 1) doing nothing[We saw it, but didn’t act on it]; what Warren calls “sucking my thumb” and 2) buying with an eyedropper things we should be buying a lot of.”  

(29)”Checklist routines avoid a lot of errors. You should have all of this elementary wisdom, and you should go through a mental checklist in order to use it. There is no other procedure that will work as well.” 还是坚持不做不对的事情的意思。  

(30)”Litigation is notoriously time-consuming, inefficient, costly and unpredictable.”  

(31)”Finding a single investment that will return 20% per year for 40 years tends to happen only in dreamland. In the real world, you uncover an opportunity, and then you compare other opportunities with that. And you only invest in the most attractive opportunities. That’s your opportunity cost. That’s what you learn in freshman economics. The game hasn’t changed at all. That’s why Modern Portfolio Theory is so asinine.”  

这游戏没变过，在哪里都一样。  

(32)”The more hard lessons you can learn vicariously rather than through your own hard experience, the better.”  

“Well, some of our success we predicted and some of it was fortuitous.”  

(33)”The general assumption is that it must be easy to sit behind a desk and people will bring in one good opportunity after another — this was the attitude in venture capital until a few years ago. This was not the case at all for us — we scrounged around for companies to buy. For 20 years, we didn’t buy more than one or two per year. …It’s fair to say that we were rooting around. There were no commissioned salesmen. Anytime you sit there waiting for a deal to come by, you’re in a very dangerous seat.” 这个有点累。  

(34)”Our biggest mistakes, were things we didn’t do, companies we didn’t buy.”  

(35)”You can progress only when you learn the method of learning.”  

(36)”It is remarkable how much long-term advantage people like us have gotten by trying to be consistently not stupid, instead of trying to be very intelligent.” 小聪明和大智慧的差别，也是坚持不做不对的事情的意思。  

(37)”Berkshire’s past record has been almost ridiculous. If Berkshire had used even half the leverage of, say, Rupert Murdoch, it would be five times its current size.”  

经常有很多人用很多margin，然后去和BRK比某年的回报，但没多少人可以把30年的总回报拿来比的，30年以后可能还是如此。  

(38)”It took us months of buying all the Coke stock we could to accumulate $1 billion worth — equal to 7% of the company. It’s very hard to accumulate major positions.”  

(39)”All large aggregations of capital eventually find it hell on earth to grow and thus find a lower rate of return”  

(40)”If you have only a little capital and are young today, there are fewer opportunities than when I was young. Back then, we had just come out of a depression. Capitalism was a bad word. There had been abuses in the 1920s. A joke going around then was the guy who said, ‘I bought stock for my old age and it worked — in six months, I feel like an old man!’ “It’s tougher for you, but that doesn’t mean you won’t do well — it just may take more time. But what the heck, you may live longer.”  

(41)”Regarding the demographic trend called Baby Boomers, it’s peanuts compared to the trend of economic growth.? Over the last century, [our] GNP is up seven times.? This was not caused by Baby Boomers, but by the general success of capitalism and the march of technology.? Those trends were so favorable that little blips in the birth rate were not that significant.??We can keep social peace as long as GNP rises 3% annually – this can pay for spending by politicians.? If we ever got to stasis [no growth], then with all the promises, you’d get real tensions between the generations.? The Baby Boomers would exacerbate it, but the real cause would be lack of growth.”  

(42)”Practically everybody overweighs the stuff that can be numbered, because it yields to the statistical techniques they’re taught in academia, and doesn’t mix in the hard-to-measure stuff that may be more important. That is a mistake I’ve tried all my life to avoid, and I have no regrets for having done that.”  

(43)”You must know the big ideas in the big disciplines, and use them routinely — all of them, not just a few. Most people are trained in one model — economics, for example — and try to solve all problems in one way. You know the old saying: to the man with a hammer, the world looks like a nail. This is a dumb way of handling problems.”  

(44)”The whole concept of dividing it up into ‘value’ and ‘growth’ strikes me as twaddle. It’s convenient for a bunch of pension fund consultants to get fees prattling about and a way for one advisor to distinguish himself from another. But, to me, all intelligent investing is value investing.”  

(45)”In my whole life, I have known no wise people who didn’t read all the time – none, zero. You’d be amazed at how much Warren reads, at how much I read. My children laugh at me. They think I’m a book with a couple of legs sticking out.”  

(46)”We read a lot.? I don’t know anyone who’s wise who doesn’t read a lot.? But that’s not enough: You have to have a temperament to grab ideas and do sensible things.? Most people don’t grab the right ideas or don’t know what to do with them.”  

(47)”We get these questions a lot from the enterprising young. It’s a very intelligent question: You look at some old guy who’s rich and you ask, ‘How can I become like you, except faster?”  

(48)”It takes almost no capital to open a new See’s candy store. We’re drowning in capital of our own that has almost no cost. It would be crazy to franchise stores like some capital-starved pancake house. We like owning our own stores as a matter of quality control”  

(49)”It’s dangerous to short stocks.”  

(50)”Being short and seeing a promoter take the stock up is very irritating. It’s not worth it to have that much irritation in your life.”  

(51)”It would be one of the most irritating experiences in the world to do a lot of work to uncover a fraud and then at have it go from X to 3X and and have the crooks happily partying with your money while you’re meeting margin calls. Why would you want to go within hailing distance of that?”  

(52)”…the cost of being a publicly traded stock has gone way, way up. It doesn’t make sense for a little company to be public anymore. A lot of little companies are going private to be rid of these burdensome requirements….”?  

(53)”Well the open-outcry auction is just made to turn the brain into mush: you’ve got social proof, the other guy is bidding, you get reciprocation tendency, you get deprival super-reaction syndrome, the thing is going away… I mean it just absolutely is designed to manipulate people into idiotic behavior.”  

(54)”The problem with closed bid auctions is that they are frequently won by people making a technical mistake, as in the case with Shell paying double for Belridge Oil. You can’t pay double the losing bid in an open outcry auction.”  

(55)”We’re partial to putting out large amounts of money where we won’t have to make another decision.”  

(56)”Understanding how to be a good investor makes you a better business manager and vice versa.”  

(57)”What’s fascinating . . .is that you could now have a business that might have been selling for $10 billion where the business itself could probably not have borrowed even $100 million. But the owners of that business, because its public, could borrow many billions of dollars on their little pieces of paper- because they had these market valuations. But as a private business, the company itself couldn’t borrow even 1/20th of what the individuals could borrow.”  

(58)”I constantly see people rise in life who are not the smartest – sometimes not even the most diligent. But they are learning machines; they go to bed every night a little wiser than when they got up. And, boy, does that habit help, particularly when you have a long run ahead of you.”  

(59)”The basic concept of value to a private owner and being motivated when you’re buying and selling securities by reference to intrinsic value instead of price momentum – I don’t think that will ever be outdated.”  

(60)”Warren and I have not made our way in life by making successful macroeconomic predictions and betting on our conclusions.”  

(61)”Well, the questioner came from Singapore which has perhaps the best economic record in the history of any developing economy and therefore he referred to 15% per annum as modest. It’s not modest–it’s arrogant. Only someone from Singapore would call it modest.”  

(62)”I don’t spend much time? regretting the past, once I’ve taken my lesson from it. I don’t dwell on it.”  

(63)”If you took our top fifteen decisions out, we’d have a pretty average record. It wasn’t hyperactivity, but a hell of a lot of patience. You stuck to your principles and when opportunities came along, you pounce on them with vigor.”  

(64)”We just throw some decisions into the ‘too hard’ file and go onto the others.”  

(65)”Forgetting your mistakes is a terrible error if you are trying to improve your cognition.”  

(66)”In the 1930s, there as a stretch here you could borrow more against the real estate than you could sell it for. I think that’s hat’s going on in today’s private-equity?world”?  

(67)”Mimicking the herd invites regression to the mean.”  

(68)”A lot of opportunities in life tend to last a short while, due to some temporary inefficiency… For each of us, really good investment opportunities aren’t going to come along too often and won’t last too long, so you’ve got to be ready to act and have a prepared mind.”  

(69)”Everywhere there is a large commission, there is a high probability of a ripoff.”  

(70)”Acknowledging what you don’t know is the dawning of wisdom.”  

(71)”Recognize reality even when you don’t like it – especially when you don’t like it.”  

(72)”We try more to profit from always remembering the obvious than from grasping the esoteric.”  

(73)?“Over the long term, it’s hard for a stock to earn a much better return that the business which underlies it earns. If the business earns six percent on capital over forty years and you hold it for that forty years, you’re not going to make much different than a six percent return – even if you originally buy it at a huge discount. Conversely, if a business earns eighteen percent on capital over twenty or thirty years, even if you pay an expensive looking price, you’ll end up with one hell of a result.”  

(74)”Just as a man working with his tools should know its limitations, a man working with his cognitive apparatus must know its limitations.”  

(75)”Many markets get down to two or three big competitors—or five or six. And in some of those markets, nobody makes any money to speak of. But in others, everybody does very well.? Over the years, we’ve tried to figure out why the competition in some markets gets sort of rational from the investor’s point of view so that the shareholders do well, and in other markets, there’s destructive competition that destroys shareholder wealth.? If it’s a pure commodity like airline seats, you can understand why no one makes any money. As we sit here, just think of what airlines have given to the world—safe travel, greater experience, time with your loved ones, you name it. Yet, the net amount of money that’s been made by the shareholders of airlines since Kitty Hawk, is now a negative figure—a substantial negative figure. Competition was so intense that, once it was unleashed by deregulation, it ravaged shareholder wealth in the airline business.? Yet, in other fields—like cereals, for example—almost all the big boys make out. If you’re some kind of a medium grade cereal maker, you might make 15% on your capital. And if you’re really good, you might make 40%. But why are cereals so profitable—despite the fact that it looks to me like they’re competing like crazy with promotions, coupons and everything else? I don’t fully understand it.? Obviously, there’s a brand identity factor in cereals that doesn’t exist in airlines. That must be the main factor that accounts for it.And maybe the cereal makers by and large have learned to be less crazy about fighting for market share—because if you get even one person who’s hell-bent on gaining market share…. For example, if I were Kellogg and I decided that I had to have 60% of the market, I think I could take most of the profit out of cereals. I’d ruin Kellogg in the process. But I think I could do it.”  

“You must have the confidence to override people with more credentials than you whose cognition is impaired by incentive-caused bias or some similar psychological force that is obviously present. But there are also cases where you have to recognize that you have no wisdom to add – and that your best course is to trust some expert.”  

(76)”In business we often find that the winning system goes almost ridiculously far in maximizing and or minimizing one or a few variables — like the discount warehouses of Costco.”  

(77)”There are worse situations than drowning in cash and sitting, sitting, sitting. I remember when I wasn’t awash in cash — and I don’t want to go back.”  

(78)”If you always tell people why, they’ll understand it better, they’ll consider it more important, and they’ll be more likely to comply.”  

(79)”Spend less than you make; always be saving something. Put it into a tax-deferred account. Over time, it will begin to amount to something. This is such a no-brainer.”  

(80)”I try to get rid of people who always confidently answer questions about which they don’t have any real knowledge.”  

(81)”I believe in the discipline of mastering the best that other people have ever figured out. I don’t believe in just sitting down and trying to dream it all up yourself. Nobody’s that smart…”  

(82)”I know someone who lives next door to what you would actually call a fairly modest house that just sold for $17 million. There are some very extreme housing price bubbles going on .”  

(83)”Experience tends to confirm a long-held notion that being prepared, on a few occasions in a lifetime, to act promptly in scale, in doing some simple and logical thing, will often dramatically improve the financial results of that lifetime. A few major opportunities, clearly recognizable as such, will usually come to one who continuously searches and waits, with a curious mind that loves diagnosis involving multiple variables. And then all that is required is a willingness to bet heavily when the odds are extremely favorable, using resources available as a result of prudence and patience in the past.”  

(84)”The present era has no comparable referent in the past history of capitalism. We have a higher percentage of the intelligentsia engaged in buying and selling pieces of paper and promoting trading activity than in any past era. A lot of what I see now reminds me of Sodom and Gomorrah. You get activity feeding on itself, envy and imitation. It has happened in the past that there came bad consequences.”  

(85)”Our investment style has been given a name – focus investing – which implies ten holdings, not one hundred or four hundred. The idea that it is hard to find good investments, so concentrate in a few, seems to me to be an obvious idea. But 98% of the investment world does not think this way. It’s been good for us.”  

(86)”You want to be very careful with intense ideology. It presents a big danger for the only mind you’re ever going to get.”  

(87)”Like Warren, I had a considerable passion to get rich. “Not because I wanted Ferraris– I wanted the independence. I desperately wanted it.”  

(88)”Anyone with an engineering frame of mind will look at [accounting standards] and want to throw up.”  

(89)”You can progress only when you learn the method of learning.”  

(90)”It’s a good habit to trumpet your failures and be quiet about your successes.”  

(91)”In effect about half our spare cash was stashed in currencies other than the dollar. I consider that a non-event. As it happens it’s been a very profitable non-event.”  

(92)”As for what we like least, we don’t want kleptocracies. We need a rule of law. If people are stealing from the companies, we don’t need that.”  

(93)”I agree with Peter Drucker that the culture and legal systems of the United States are especially favorable to shareholder interests, compared to other interests and compared to most other countries. Indeed, there are many other countries where any good going to public shareholders has a very low priority and almost every other constituency stands higher in line.”  

(94)”Berkshire in its history has made money betting on sure things.”  

(95)”I don’t think there’s any business that we’ve bought that would have sold itself to a hedge fund. There’s a class of businesses that doesn’t want to deal with private-equity and hedge funds…thank God”  

(96)”We’re guessing at our future opportunity cost. Warren is guessing that he’ll have the opportunity to put capital out at high rates of return, so he’s not willing to put it out at less than 10% now. But if we knew interest rates would stay at 1%, we’d change. Our hurdles reflect our estimate of future opportunity costs.”  

(97)”Our ideas are so simple that people keep asking us for mysteries when all we have are the most elementary ideas.”  

(98)”The idea of a margin of safety, a Graham precept, will never be obsolete. The idea of making the market your servant will never be obsolete. The idea of being objective and dispassionate will never be obsolete. So Graham had a lot of wonderful ideas.”  

(99)”Ben Graham could run his Geiger counter over this detritus from the collapse of the 1930s and find things selling below their working capital per share and so on….? But he was, by and large, operating when the world was in shell shock from the 1930s—which was the worst contraction in the English-speaking world in about 600 years. Wheat in Liverpool, I believe, got down to something like a 600-year low, adjusted for inflation. the classic Ben Graham concept is that gradually the world wised up and those real obvious bargains disappeared. You could run your Geiger counter over the rubble and it wouldn’t click. … Ben Graham followers responded by changing the calibration on their Geiger counters. In effect, they started defining a bargain in a different way. And they kept changing the definition so that they could keep doing what they’d always done. And it still worked pretty well.”  

(100)”Warren and I don’t feel like we have any great advantage in the high-tech sector. In fact, we feel like we’re at a big disadvantage in trying to understand the nature of technical developments in software, computer chips or what have you. So we tend to avoid that stuff, based on our personal inadequacies. Again, that is a very, very powerful idea. Every person is going to have a circle of competence. And it’s going to be very hard to advance that circle. If I had to make my living as a musician…. I can’t even think of a level low enough to describe where I would be sorted out to if music were the measuring standard of the civilization.? So you have to figure out what your own aptitudes are. If you play games where other people have the aptitudes and you don’t, you’re going to lose. And that’s as close to certain as any prediction that you can make. You have to figure out where you’ve got an edge. And you’ve got to play within your own circle of competence.? If you want to be the best tennis player in the world, you may start out trying and soon find out that it’s hopeless—that other people blow right by you. However, if you want to become the best plumbing contractor in Bemidji, that is probably doable by two-thirds of you. It takes a will. It takes the intelligence. But after a while, you’d gradually know all about the plumbing business in Bemidji and master the art. That is an attainable objective, given enough discipline. And people who could never win a chess tournament or stand in center court in a respectable tennis tournament can rise quite high in life by slowly developing a circle of competence—which results partly from what they were born with and partly from what they slowly develop through work.”  

(101)”Beta and modern portfolio theory and the like – none of it makes any sense to me.”  

(102)”Today, it seems to be regarded as the duty of CEOs to make the stock go up. This leads to all sorts of foolish behavior. We want to tell it like it is.”  

(103)”Our standard prescription for the know-nothing investor with a long-term time horizon is a no-load index fund. I think that works better than relying on your stock broker. The people who are telling you to do something else are all being paid by commissions or fees. The result is that while index fund investing is becoming more and more popular, by and large it’s not the individual investors that are doing it. It’s the institutions.”  

(104)”closet indexing….you’re paying a manager a fortune and he has 85% of his assets invested parallel to the indexes. If you have such a system, you’re being played for a sucker.”  

(105)”Black-Scholes is a know-nothing system. If you know nothing about value — only price — then Black-Scholes is a pretty good guess at what a 90-day option might be worth. But the minute you get into longer periods of time, it’s crazy to get into Black-Scholes.”  

(106)”Black-Scholes works for short-term options, but if it’s a long-term option and you think you know something [about the underlying asset], it’s insane to use Black-Scholes.”  

(107)”It’s hard to predict what will happen with two brands in a market.? Sometimes they will behave in a gentlemanly way, and sometimes they’ll pound each other.? I know of no way to predict whether they’ll compete moderately or to the death.? If you could figure it out, you could make a lot of money.”  

(108)”We’ve really made the money out of high quality businesses. In some cases, we bought the whole business. And in some cases, we just bought a big block of stock. But when you analyze what happened, the big money’s been made in the high quality businesses. And most of the other people who’ve made a lot of money have done so in high quality businesses.”  

(109)”A lot of share-buying, not bargain-seeking, is designed to prop stock prices up. Thirty to 40 years ago, it was very profitable to look at companies that were aggressively buying their own shares. They were motivated simply to buy below what it was worth.”  

(110)”There are two kinds of businesses: The first earns 12%, and you can take it out at the end of the year. The second earns 12%, but all the excess cash must be reinvested — there’s never any cash. It reminds me of the guy who looks at all of his equipment and says, “There’s all of my profit.” We hate that kind of business. “  

(111)”There are actually businesses, that you will find a few times in a lifetime, where any manager could raise the return enormously just by raising prices—and yet they haven’t done it. So they have huge untapped pricing power that they’re not using. That is the ultimate no-brainer. … Disney found that it could raise those prices a lot and the attendance stayed right up.? So a lot of the great record of Eisner and Wells … came from just raising prices at Disneyland and Disneyworld and through video cassette sales of classic animated movies… At Berkshire Hathaway, Warren and I raised the prices of See’s Candy a little faster than others might have. And, of course, we invested in Coca-Cola—which had some untapped pricing power. And it also had brilliant management. So a Goizueta and Keough could do much more than raise prices. It was perfect.”  

(112)”At Berkshire Hathaway we do not like to compete against Chinese manufacturers.”  

(113)”Berkshire is in the business of making easy predictions ?If a deal looks too hard, the partners simply shelve it.”  

(114)”We’re the tortoise that has outrun the hare because it chose the easy predictions.”  

(115)”"Warren and I avoid doing anything that someone else at Berkshire can do better. You don’t really have a competency if you don’t know the edge of it.”  

(116)”Understanding both the power of compound return and the difficulty of getting it is the heart and soul of understanding a lot of things.”?  

(117)”Generally speaking, it can’t be good to be running a big current account deficit and a big fiscal deficit and have them both growing. You would be thinking the end there would be a comeuppance.” “[But] it isn’t as though all the other options look wonderful compared to the US. It gives me some feeling that what I regard as fiscal misbehavior on our part could go on some time without paying the price.”  

(118)”We started from such a strong position. It’s not as if the alternatives are all so great. I can understand why people would rather invest in the? U.S. Do you want to be in Europe, where 12-13% of people are unemployed and most 28-year-olds are living at home and being paid by state to do it? Or be in Brazil or Venezuela with the political instability that you fear? It’s not totally irrational that? people still like the U.S., despite its faults. Whatever misbehavior there is could go on quite a long time without a price being paid.”  

(119)”Almost all good businesses engage in ‘pain today, gain tomorrow’ activities.”  

(120)”No CEO examining books today understands what the hell is going on.”  

(121)”Generally speaking, if you’re counting on outside directors to act [forcefully to protect your interests as a shareholder, then you’re crazy].? As a general rule in? America, boards act only if there’s been a severe disgrace. My friend Joe was asked to be on the board of Northwestern Bell and he jokes that ‘it was the last thing they ever asked me.’?I think you get better directors when you get directors who don’t need the money. ?When it’s half your income and all your retirement, you’re not likely to be very independent.? But when you have money and an existing reputation that you don’t want to lose, then you’ll act more independently.”  

(122)”If mutual fund directors are independent, then I’m the lead character in the Bolshoi Ballet.”  

(123)”Of course I’m troubled by huge consumer debt levels – we’ve pushed consumer credit very hard in the US.? Eventually, if it keeps growing, it will stop growing. As Herb Stein said, “If something cannot go on forever, it will stop.”? When it stops, it may be unpleasant.? Other than Herb Stein’s quote, I have no comment.”  

(124)”?I think it would be a great improvement if there were no D&O insurance . The counter-argument is that no-one with any money would serve on a board. But I think net net you’d be better off.”  

(125)”We don’t care about quarterly earnings (though obviously we care about how the business is doing over time) and are unwilling to manipulate in any way to make some quarter look better.”  

(126)”What we don’t like in modern capitalism is the expectations game. It’s not the kissing cousin of evil; it’s the blood brother.”  

(127)”There are a lot of things we pass on. We have three baskets: in, out, and too tough…We have to have a special insight, or we’ll put it in the ‘too tough’ basket. All of you have to look for a special area of competency and focus on that.”  

(128)”We have a history when things are really horrible of wading in when no one else will.”  

(129)”We have monetized houses in this country in a way that’s never occurred before. Ask Joe how he bought a new Cadillac [and he’ll say] from borrowing on his house. We are awash in capital. [Being] awash is leading to very terrible behavior by credit cards and subprime lenders -a very dirty business, luring people into a disadvantageous position. It’s a new way of getting serfs, and it’s a dirty business. We have financial institutions, including those with big names, extending high-cost credit to the least able people. I find a lot of it revolting. Just because it’s a free market doesn’t mean it’s honorable.”  

(130)”We don’t believe that markets are totally efficient and we don’t believe that widespread diversification will yield a good result.? We believe almost all good investments will involve relatively low diversification. Maybe 2% of people will come into our corner of the tent and the rest of the 98% will believe what they’ve been told.”  

(131)”Efficient market theory [is]? a wonderful economic doctrine that had a long vogue in spite of the experience of Berkshire Hathaway. In fact one of the economists who won — he shared a Nobel Prize — and as he looked at Berkshire Hathaway year after year, which people would throw in his face as saying maybe the market isn’t quite as efficient as you think, he said, “Well, it’s a two-sigma event.” And then he said we were a three-sigma event. And then he said we were a four-sigma event. And he finally got up to six sigmas — better to add a sigma than change a theory, just because the evidence comes in differently.And, of course, when this share of a Nobel Prize went into money management himself, he sank like a stone.”  

(132)”I know just enough about? thermodynamics to understand that if it takes too much fossil-fuel energy to create ethanol, that’s a very stupid way to solve an energy problem.”  

(133)”It is entirely possible that you could use our mental models to find good IPOs to buy. There are countless IPOs every year, and I’m sure that there are a few cinches that you could jump on. But the average person is going to get creamed. So if you’re talented, good luck. IPOs are too small for us, or too high tech, so we won’t understand them. So, if Warren’s looking at them, I don’t know about it.”  

我对刚刚IPO的公司也不感兴趣，主要是没足够时间和资料去搞懂。  

(134)”Well envy/jealousy made, what, two out of the ten commandments? Those of you who have raised siblings you know about envy, or tried to run a law firm or investment bank or even a faculty? I’ve heard Warren say a half a dozen times, “It’s not greed that drives the world, but envy.”  

(135)”Suppose, any one of you knew of a wonderful thing right now that you were overwhelmingly confident- and correctly so- would produce about 12% per annum compounded as far as you could see. Now, if you actually had that available, and by going into it you were forfeiting all opportunities to make money faster- there’re a lot of you who wouldn’t like that. But a lot of you would think, “What the hell do I care if somebody else makes money faster?” There’s always going to be somebody who is making money faster, running the mile faster or what have you. So in a human sense, once you get something that works fine in your life, the idea of caring terribly that somebody else is making money faster strikes me as insane.”  这里我看到两点：1.[[平常心]]地呆在自己[[能力圈]]内; 2. 12%是个可接受的年复合回报率。  

**评论**  
<ul><li><strong>xlli777</strong> (2012-06-20 12:24): 学长您好，又要请教您两个问题了。 1，这两年围绕雅虎和阿里巴巴发生了不少事情，您还会继续持有它的股票吗？ 2，有朋友提醒我，如果一个市值较小的公司股权又特别集中，比如60%以上在一个人手里，即使股价看起来很划算也不要去买。朋友的逻辑是说基金喜欢做空这种股票获利，比较容易操作。您是怎么看这类公司的呢？<ul><li><strong>[[段永平]]</strong> → xlli777 (2012-06-20 14:00): 1.我一直拿着一直卖着call，call走再说。 2。你该换朋友了。</li><li><strong>algor</strong> → 段永平 (2012-06-20 14:32): CALL 走，您会再卖 yahoo的 PUT 吗？</li><li><strong>加忠</strong> → 段永平 (2012-06-20 14:57): 一直感觉淘宝假货多，后来想明白了，其实淘宝的假货比现实中少的多，淘宝的监督体系比现实中强的多，最后假货不好生存的。</li><li><strong>段永平</strong> → algor (2012-06-20 22:42): 有可能，但要看premium如何以及当时有没有其他目标。</li><li><strong>段永平</strong> → 加忠 (2012-06-20 22:43): 这个想法有智慧啊！</li><li><strong>段永平</strong> → xlli777 (2012-06-20 22:46): 2.当时[[网易]]就是这种情况。假如几乎所有人突然都跑来卖空[[苹果]]，几年后苹果的价钱会怎么样？你要没搞懂这个，你就要回到价值投资的小学一年级从头来过哈。</li><li><strong>木买蚂蚁</strong> → 加忠 (2012-06-20 22:57): 一直在淘宝上买东西，好像没有买到假货。</li><li><strong>风</strong> → 木买蚂蚁 (2012-06-21 00:14): 去年新居装修的时候在淘宝买了些龙头、厨房电器、厨房用品、茶具等，后来陆续发现买到的都不是自己想买的东西，产品的品名、产品的描述以及厂家的名称很多商家都在玩文字游戏，被忽悠了还找不到正当理由投诉，看来要想网购到称心如意的商品，还得把自已修炼成专家级的买家才行。</li><li><strong>伍兴</strong> → 段永平 (2012-06-21 07:33): 公司价值和市场情绪无关，价格也一定会回归价值，这就是投资！我来这里的第一天就悟明白了，生活因此幸福了很多！^_^</li><li><strong>bigfigure</strong> → 段永平 (2012-06-21 10:10): 卖Call，是不是相当于为这支股票设定了一个卖出价格，达到了这一价格就必须卖出？这个卖出价格随便定吗？</li><li><strong>段永平</strong> → 伍兴 (2012-06-21 10:25): </li><li><strong>xlli777</strong> → 段永平 (2012-06-21 13:56): 嗯，明白了！我回头想了一下认为我的疑虑确实是不合理的，如果称得上是“划算”的价格,就不应该因为这些浮云而担心。其实也可以具体说，我说的是市值8亿多的堡狮龙（Bossini, 592.HK），是个平民服装品牌，我每季都会买几件他们的衣服，他们大部分业务在香港，对于我这种非专业投资者也可以随时查看他们的生意好坏。这个公司银行里有4亿现金，向未来长期看的话每年净赚的钱在五千万到一亿之间（我猜的），我认为是属于good price for fair company那一类。如果我对它未来的盈利能力特别有信心，肯定不会在意股权集中这一类的问题，我想我的疑惑的根源可能还是在于没看到足够大的[[安全边际]]。 另外我也想请教学长，您的经验比较丰富，有没有听说过大股东恶意摊薄小股东股份的情况？这在法律上有没有可操作性？不知道我的这个疑惑会不会太幼稚</li><li><strong>algor</strong> → xlli777 (2012-06-21 23:39): 个人觉得，从财务上看这公司还算便宜，但是没什么[[护城河]]，品牌力在下降。</li><li><strong>dongtao1026</strong> → 伍兴 (2012-06-22 12:27): 你很厉害，其实价值投资个人理解就是坚持你最初的想法，中间无论多大的变动，稳如泰山，越简单越好。但是选择之前的功夫要做足！</li><li><strong>伍兴</strong> → dongtao1026 (2012-06-22 22:12): 也许有缘的朋友一点就明白了，然后通过不断的学习沉淀会有更好更深的理解！</li><li><strong>段永平</strong> → xlli777 (2012-06-24 08:06): 说你该换朋友的意思是该换朋友讨论投资了，你这个朋友基本逻辑没搞明白。</li><li><strong>xlli777</strong> → 段永平 (2012-06-24 12:52): 呵呵，我觉得也是，我那位朋友是专业分析师。我发现和“专业人士”讨论投资问题确实不太靠谱，往往听到一大堆貌似很“内幕”和“真相”的观点。但反过来想这些专业的朋友除了从事薪资很高的金融工作以外，并没有投资水平比我自己高明的证据。</li><li><strong>段永平</strong> → xlli777 (2012-06-26 04:12): (8)”Virtually every investment expert’s public assessment is that he is above average, no matter what is the evidence to the contrary.”</li><li><strong>余祥平</strong> → 伍兴 (2012-07-13 15:28): 有同感，悟明白了投资，生活就幸福了很多。</li></ul></li><li><strong>龙常青</strong> (2012-06-26 08:32): (7)”For society, the Internet is wonderful, but for capitalists, it will be a net negative. It will increase efficiency, but lots of things increase efficiency without increasing profits. It is way more likely to make American businesses less profitable than more profitable. This is perfectly obvious, but very little understood.”---的确绝大部分人包括capitalists, 都认为互联网是第二次工业革命， 带来的商机和利润才刚刚开始，请教段总，Miunger老先生为什么会这样看？你怎么看？</li><li><strong>duwenhua198511</strong> (2012-06-22 07:58): 段总：来个中文的，不过有点乱 http://duwenhua198511.blog.163.com/blog/static/7359050120125227531541/<ul><li><strong>段永平</strong> → duwenhua198511 (2012-06-22 10:09): 那个翻译不能用的。</li><li><strong>xlli777</strong> → 段永平 (2012-06-22 14:04): 我翻了一部分， http://xlli777.blog.163.com/blog/static/138567771201252204021138/ 随时再更新。</li><li><strong>jianxiongzb</strong> → xlli777 (2012-06-22 18:14): 谷歌翻译的吧</li><li><strong>段永平</strong> → jianxiongzb (2012-06-22 23:26): 这是什么话？他翻的比google翻的好太多了。</li><li><strong>jianxiongzb</strong> → 段永平 (2012-06-23 18:00): 不好意思，我回复的对象错了。我实际验证了，最上面duwenhua198511那个内容全的链接确实是谷歌在线翻译的…期待xlli777兄的最新译文</li></ul></li><li><strong>茶水铺</strong> (2012-06-22 10:06): 投资有价值的公司。</li><li><strong>bigfatcat</strong> (2012-06-21 16:48): 想想作为一个业余投资的小散，能力圈有限。好像这样做才更有[[确定性]]： 1.买白马股，有良好历史记录的确定性强的白马股。 2.在闭着眼睛都敢买的时候闭着眼睛买，然后持有。 3.留意自己身边的优质公司，99%确认是黑马时候把白马换过来。<ul><li><strong>寒江小笛</strong> → bigfatcat (2012-06-21 22:39): 就是好公司价格又不贵的时候买入并[[长期持有]]</li></ul></li><li><strong>稀土老老老农</strong> (2012-06-20 23:29): 段总，有中文版吗？</li><li><strong>茶水铺</strong> (2012-06-20 18:31): 投资应该投最好的公司，往往第一名和第二名的价值差别很大。</li><li><strong>history023</strong> (2012-06-19 11:05): 学习</li><li><strong>bigfigure</strong> (2012-06-19 10:32): 感谢分享，查理长老的剑只授给值得佩戴它的人。</li><li><strong>arthor</strong> (2012-06-18 22:24): 段总我终于明白乔布斯奇特的造钟方式,他把他的理念风格文化注入的公司,同时也以特有的方式造就了火星团队.不过我还是不太了解董事会的组成以及背景按巴老的说法应该有几个要素的.嗯,还是我自己再想想吧</li><li><strong>红星照我去战斗</strong> (2012-06-18 21:16): “未来不属于自己的钱”，这个概念很好啊，能帮助看清很多事情。</li><li><strong>击鼓不传花</strong> (2012-06-18 20:59): (5)”If you buy something because it’s undervalued, then you have to think about selling it when it approaches your calculation of its intrinsic value. That’s hard. But if you buy a few great companies, then you can sit on your ass. That’s a good thing.” 这句能让&quot;猿&quot;进化到&quot;人&quot; (7)”For society, the Internet is wonderful, but for capitalists, it will be a net negative. It will increase efficiency, but lots of things increase efficiency without increasing profits. It is way more likely to make American businesses less profitable than more profitable. This is perfectly obvious, but very little understood.” 今天学到这二句.</li><li><strong>金牛贺岁</strong> (2012-06-18 14:21): 老段，有中文版的没？</li><li><strong>付潭</strong> (2012-06-18 14:21): 段大哥一下贴的太多了呢，本来可以看几句，这下一看头大了，回头自己翻穷查理宝典了。</li><li><strong>宋大开</strong> (2012-06-18 09:40): 看来我们的段总已是英语思维了，其实我个人有很多时间，可是畏惧学习语言，但非常喜欢段总的博文，我在段总学了很多这东西。这句“让我想起那些为避税而搬离加州的有钱的朋友们”能不能理解为，一般在本地不产生富豪，富豪都发迹于外地，这是已逝去的邱永汉说的。 看来要在英语上下工夫了，不然看懂了。</li></ul>  
