---
title: "2011年04月20日"
date: 2011-04-21
source: "网易博客"
source_url: "http://nteswjq.blog.163.com/blog/static/1269981201132175020695/"
type: "blog"
---

Award-winning British photo-journalist killed in Libya's crossfire  

Celebrated for his war images and Oscar-nominated for 'Restrepo', Tim Hetherington is first Western journalist to die in the conflict  

By Kim Sengupta, Defence Correspondent  

Thursday, 21 April 2011  

EPA  

Tim Hetherington in Zurich after winning the 2007 World Press Photo Award for American Soldier taken in Afghanistan  

The British photojournalist Tim Hetherington, whose documentary on the Afghan war, Restrepo, was nominated for an Oscar, was killed in Libya yesterday while covering fighting in the besieged opposition-held city of Misrata.  

Mr Hetherington, 41, is the first Western journalist to lose his life while covering the Libyan civil war. Three other journalists with him were injured, including photographers Chris Hondros and Guy Martin who were seriously hurt.  

Mr Hondros, an American working for the Getty photo agency, suffered a severe brain injury and was in a critical condition, according to a colleague who was with them when they were treated. Mr Martin, a British citizen working for the Panos photo agency, had suffered shrapnel wounds and was undergoing surgery.  

**评论**  
<ul><li><strong>bigfigure</strong> (2011-04-21 10:42): 向献身于自己热爱事业的人们致敬！</li><li><strong>戴文群</strong> (2011-04-21 10:41): 不知道他是以一种什么心态来拍摄这些照片的呢？其实能死在自己喜欢的工作中，还是划算的。</li><li><strong>[[段永平]]</strong> (2011-04-21 07:53): </li></ul>  
